---
layout: post
title: Introducing SymPDE 
---

[SymPDE](https://github.com/pyccel/sympde) is a Python library built on the top of [SymPy](https://github.com/sympy/sympy), for representing weak formulations of partial differential equations (PDEs). 

SymPDE can be viewed as a domain specific language or as a static compiler for [variational formulations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weak_formulation) of PDEs through an abstract representation of mathematical expressions. SymPDE does not provide discrete finite elements spaces, but only abstract notions that can be mapped onto discrete ones by third party libraries. 

Finally, different utilities were implemented to create and manipulate the abstract syntax tree needed for the code generation. 

## UFL library

Before talking about SymPDE, let's take a look at the well known [UFL](https://bitbucket.org/fenics-project/ufl) library from the [FEniCS](https://fenicsproject.org/) project.

Let's take the following variational problem

> *Find $u \in V_h$ such that,*
$$
\begin{equation}
\quad
a(v,u) = l(v), \quad \forall v \in V_h
\end{equation}
$$

where
$$
a(v,u) := \int_{\Omega} vu + \frac{k}{2} ( \nabla v \cdot \nabla u)~d\Omega 
\\
l(v) := \int_{\Omega} vu_0 + \frac{k}{2} ( \nabla v \cdot \nabla u_0)~d\Omega 
$$

The associated UFL code is given in [Equation.ufl](https://bitbucket.org/fenics-project/ufl/raw/a6e889ca592d5dd2304ceb6afb82d09e3569968c/demo/Equation.ufl): 

```python
element = FiniteElement("Lagrange", triangle, 1)

k = 0.1

v = TestFunction(element)
u = TrialFunction(element)
u0 = Coefficient(element)

F = v*(u - u0)*dx + k*dot(grad(v), grad(0.5*(u0 + u)))*dx

a = lhs(F)
L = rhs(F)
```

### What I don't like about UFL

**UFL** and **FEniCS** are really great, however, there are many things that I don't like about them. For example:

1. We Have to specify which kind of Finite Element we will be using, in order to define a weak formulation.
2. There is no integral! The integration over the domain is used implicitly
3. **dot** and **grad** operators rely on syntactic sugar! this means that **UFL** does not know what **grad(u-u)** means, nor that the **grad** operator is linear!
4. While **a** must be a Bilinear Form, there is now way for **UFL** to ensure it! 

The last point is the most critical for me; up to my knwonledge, almost all Finite Elements libraries rely on syntactic sugar and do not ensure that a Bilinear Form that is declared is indeed, mathematically speeking, Bilinear!

An this is where **SymPDE** comes into the play!

## From Curry-Howard correspondence to Finite Elements

While I was still working at Max Planck IPP, and developping a Finite Elements framework for Computational Plasma Physics simumlations, I got fascinated by the work of [Vladimir Voevodsky](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vladimir_Voevodsky) and in particular, by the emerging field on [Homotopy Type Theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homotopy_type_theory) (For those who are interested, you can take a lok at the [HOTT book](https://homotopytypetheory.org/book/)).

Anyway, one of the most important point in the design of **SymPDE** is the [Curry-Howard correspondence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curry%E2%80%93Howard_correspondence), which states the equivalence between **propositions** (mathematical proofs) and **types** (computer programs).

What I wanted is something like the following:

```python
    a = BilinearForm((v,u), 
                     integral(domain, 
                              v*u + 0.5*k*dot(grad(v), grad(u)))
                    )
```

and if **a** is created, then I am sure that it is a bilinear form! Notice, that this example is equivalent to the **UFL** one.

Not only I want to ensure that **a** is bilinear, but I also want it to be callable and be able to linearize nonlinear problems etc, which is really awsome when deriving models.

The way we declare a Bilinear or Linear Form in **SymPDE**, is exactly the notion of Curry-Howard correspondence!

## How can we achieve the Curry-Howard correspondence?

Well, this is exactly what I will try to do in the next posts! Here are some steps towards achieving our goal:

1. First we need to implement all the operators that one may use when writing a weak formulation, which can be splitted into different categories:
  - Algebraic operators
  - Differential operators
  - Other operators, mainly those related to topology 
2. Introduce some Topological notions
  - What is a Domain?
  - Function Spaces (for scalar and vector functions)

For sure, these are not the only steps, but they are, at this stage, the most important.

Also, unlike **Sympy**, we want a library that implements the structural properties related to Topological Spaces, and not in a constructive way.
